[Music]
myths and misconceptions about evolution
let's talk about evolution you've
probably heard that some people consider
it controversial even though most
scientists don't but even if you aren't
one of those people and you think you
have a pretty good understanding of
evolution chances are you still believe
some things about it that aren't
entirely right things like evolution is
organisms adapting to their environment
this was an earlier now discredited
theory of evolution almost 60 years
before Darwin published his book
jean-baptiste Lamarck proposed that
creatures evolved by developing certain
traits over their lifetimes and then
passing those on to their offspring
for example he thought that because
giraffes spent their lives stretching to
reach leaves on higher branches their
children would be born with longer necks
but we know now that's not how genetic
inheritance works in fact individual
organisms don't evolve at all instead
random genetic mutations cause some
giraffes to be born with longer necks
and that gives them a better chance to
survive than the ones who weren't so
lucky which brings us to survival of the
fittest this makes it sound like
evolution always favors the biggest
strongest or fastest creatures which is
not really the case for one thing
evolutionary Fitness is just a matter of
how well-suited they are to their
current environment if all the tall
trees suddenly died out and only short
grass was left all those long necked
giraffes would be at a disadvantage
secondly survival is not how evolution
occurs reproduction is and the world is
full of creatures like the male
anglerfish which is so small and ill
suited for survival at birth that it has
to quickly find a mate before it dies
but at least we can say that if an
organism dies without reproducing its
evolutionarily useless right wrong
remember natural selection happens not
at the org
level but at the genetic level and the
same gene that exists in one organism
will also exist in its relatives so a
gene that makes an animal altruistically
sacrifice itself to help the survival
and future reproduction of its siblings
or cousins can become more widespread
than one that is solely concerned with
self-preservation anything that lets
more copies of the gene pass on to the
next generation will serve its purpose
except evolutionary purpose one of the
most difficult things to keep in mind
about evolution is that when we say
things like genes want to make more
copies of themselves or even natural
selection we're actually using metaphors
a gene doesn't want anything and there's
no outside mechanism that selects which
genes are best to preserve all that
happens is that random genetic mutations
cause the organisms carrying them to
behave or develop in different ways some
of those ways result in more copies of
the mutated gene being passed on and so
forth nor is there any predetermined
plan progressing towards an ideal form
it's not ideal for the human eye to have
a blind spot where the optic nerve exits
the retina but that's how it developed
starting from a simple photoreceptor
cell in retrospect it would have been
much more advantageous for humans to
crave nutrients and vitamins rather than
just calories but over the millennia
during which our ancestors evolved
calories were scarce and there was
nothing to anticipate that this would
later change so quickly
so evolution proceeds blindly step by
step by step creating all of the
diversity we see in the natural world
you